---
layout: ../../../layouts/Route.astro
title: Puerto del Léon
cover: 'puertoleon'
route: 'puertoleon'
stats:
  distance: 46
  elevation: 1050
  difficulty: intermediate
  maxAltitude: 935m
---

<h2 class="text-3xl font-medium leading-none mb-4">The route</h2>
 
Starting in Málaga city, it's uphill from the very start. The only
flat piece of road you will find in these parts is the Paseo Maritimo;
you could take a quick spin to Pedrejalego and come back before you
start climbing.
  
<br />

The route is essentially going up and down the Puerto del Léon. It is
a climb that has a bit of everything: it's got steep bits, it's got
relatively flat sections and even a tiny bit of descent before you
tackle the last 2 hard kilometers. There are hairpin corners and even
two tiny tunnels halfway up the climb.
 
<br/>

Don't be fooled by the statistics: 16km at 5.6% on average hardly sounds like a tough challenge. 
The difficulty of the climb, as is with many Spanish climbs, is that you can never find a rythm due to the constants changes in the gradient.

<img
  src="/the-average-cyclist/routes/puertoleon/climb.webp"
  alt="A bird sitting on a nest of eggs."
  class="mt-4 mb-4"
  height={350}
  width={750}
/>

As you leave Málaga's center at the roundabout of Olletas, 5 tough
kilometers will get you warmed up right away. Sections of 10% are
rewarded by relative flat areas, and you'll repeat that until you pass
the first venta, a roadside restaurant, Venta Carlos del Mirador.
  
<h2 class="text-3xl font-medium leading-none mt-4 mb-4">Fueling up</h2>

The route is only 50 kilometers long, so you could easily fill up your
bottles before you set off. Along the A-7000, which is the road
leading up to Puerto Léon, there are several roadside restaurants
where you could take a short break. At the top of the climb, you
arrive at Fuente de la Reina, which throughout most of the year has a
water source with potable water. Don't count on it in Summer though.
Next to the water source is yet another cafe, popular with
motorcyclists and car enthusiasts, and 200 meter down the road is
another restaurant that serves hearty meals.
  
<br/>

On the way down, there's also a little cafe in the settlement of
Olías. A few kilometers down, you arrive back in El Palo where you
will find ample establishments to reward yourself with a coffee or
something stronger.
  <br/>

<br />
<h2 class="text-3xl font-medium leading-none mb-4">Good to know</h2>

<h3 class="text-2xl font-medium mt-4 mb-4">Alternative routes</h3>

The reversed route is just as nice. Even better is that you have about
10km of warmup along the flat coastal road before you begin the climb.
The climb to Olías has lots of twists and turns and can be more
enjoyable than the ascent along the A-7000, although the road surface
is not of the same quality. Beware that you will have to face 'El Muro
de Olías' shortly after having left Olías. It's a 1km ramp with
sections up to 17%, and it continues for a while before you reach the
summit, so don't go all out on the first part of the climb towards
Olías.

<br/>

If you don't feel like climbing the wall, you could take a right turn
upon leaving Olías (MA-3202) that will take you to Totalán and back
down to La Cala de Moral. It's a technical and at times steep decent
on a rather narrow road with lots of blind corners, so stay focused.
When you're down at the coast, you'll have to go on a dual-carriage
way (the MA-24) along the scenic cement factory for 2 km and will take
you back to El Palo and Málaga.

<br/>

<h3 class="text-2xl font-medium mt-4 mb-4">Tip</h3>

This is a popular route with motorcyclists and car enthusiasts during
weekends and holidays. Some of the drivers have very little awareness
of cyclists and will go very fast with little regard of what comes
behind the bend. Although it is generally very safe and the Spanish
are the most courteous drivers toward cyclists in the entire world, I
suggest doing this route early in the morning on a weekday. You'll be
sharing the road only with squirrels, boars that cross the road, the
odd farmer that has to attend to this farm in the beautiful Montes de
Málaga. If you're planning to do this route in Summer, you'll want to
ride early anyway as temperatures quickly rise up to 30 degrees, even
when the sun hasn't risen yet.

